{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.22621}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\f0\fs36\lang9\par
Music Genre Classification Project Documentation\par

\pard\sl276\slmult1\fs28 Introduction\b0\par
This documentation outlines the details of a music genre classification project. The project aims to develop a machine learning model capable of accurately classifying music tracks into different genres based on their audio features. Specifically, this documentation focuses on comparing the performance of two different classification algorithms: K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) and Naive Bayes.\par
\par
\b Purpose\b0\par
The purpose of this project is to develop a robust machine learning model for music genre classification. By leveraging audio features extracted from music tracks, the model aims to accurately classify each track into one of several predefined genres. This classification capability serves several purposes:\par
\par
Music Recommendation Systems: Accurate genre classification enables the development of personalized music recommendation systems. By understanding the genre preferences of users, the system can suggest relevant tracks that match their tastes.\par
\par
Content Organization: Music streaming platforms and digital libraries can benefit from automated genre classification to organize their vast catalogs of music. This helps users discover new music within their preferred genres more efficiently.\par
\par
Market Segmentation: Understanding the popularity of different music genres among listeners can aid in market segmentation for music industry stakeholders. This information can inform marketing strategies, concert planning, and content creation.\par
\par
Academic Research: Music genre classification serves as a challenging problem in the field of audio signal processing and machine learning. Research in this area contributes to advancements in both music analysis techniques and classification algorithms.\par
\par
\b Objectives\b0\par
The primary objectives of the project remain unchanged:\par
\par
Develop a Machine Learning Model: Build a robust machine learning model capable of accurately classifying music tracks into predefined genres.\par
\par
Utilize Audio Features: Extract relevant audio features from the music tracks to represent their characteristics effectively.\par
\par
Compare Model Performance: Evaluate and compare the performance of KNN and Naive Bayes classifiers to determine their effectiveness in music genre classification.\par
\par
\b Dataset\b0\par
The project continues to use the "GTZAN Genre Collection" dataset, comprising 1000 audio tracks categorized into 10 different genres.\par
\par
\b Feature Extraction and Representation\b0\par
Feature extraction is a crucial step in music genre classification, as it involves converting raw audio data into a format suitable for machine learning algorithms. The following features are commonly extracted from music tracks:\par
\par
Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs): Captures the spectral characteristics of the audio signal.\par
\par
Spectral Centroid: Represents the "center of mass" of the spectrum and provides information about the brightness of the sound.\par
\par
Chroma Frequencies: Describes the distribution of energy across pitch classes (e.g., C, C#, D, etc.).\par
\par
Rhythm Patterns: Captures rhythmic information using techniques such as beat tracking and tempo estimation.\par
\par
These features are then represented as numerical vectors, forming the input data for the classification models.\par
\par
\b Model Architecture\b0\par
K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) Classifier:\par
Algorithm: Utilizes a non-parametric approach for classification based on feature similarity.\par
\par
Training: Stores all training data points in memory.\par
\par
Inference: Predicts the class label of a test sample by a majority vote of its nearest neighbors in the feature space.\par
\par
\b Naive Bayes Classifier:\b0\par
Algorithm: Based on Bayes' theorem and assumes independence between features.\par
\par
Assumption: Assumes that the presence of a particular feature in a class is unrelated to the presence of any other feature.\par
\par
Training: Estimates class-conditional probabilities and prior probabilities from the training data.\par
\par
Inference: Calculates the posterior probability of each class given the input features and selects the class with the highest probability.\par
\par
\b Range of Factors in Genres to be Classified\b0\par
The music genres to be classified encompass a wide range of factors, including but not limited to:\par
\par
Melody: The sequence of musical notes and their arrangement.\par
\par
Rhythm: The timing and tempo of musical patterns.\par
\par
Harmony: The combination of simultaneous musical notes to produce chords and chord progressions.\par
\par
Instrumentation: The types of musical instruments used in the composition.\par
\par
Vocal Style: The characteristics of vocal performances, including pitch, timbre, and delivery.\par
\par
These factors contribute to the distinctiveness of each genre and serve as the basis for classification.\par
\b\par
Solution\par
\b0 The proposed solution involves implementing and comparing the performance of KNN and Naive Bayes classifiers for music genre classification:\par
\par
Feature Extraction: Extract relevant audio features from music tracks, including MFCCs, spectral centroid, and chroma frequencies.\par
\par
Model Training: Train KNN and Naive Bayes classifiers using the extracted features.\par
\par
Evaluation: Evaluate the performance of both classifiers using metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score.\par
\par
Comparison: Compare the performance of KNN and Naive Bayes classifiers to determine their effectiveness in classifying music genres.\par
\par
By following this approach, the project aims to identify the most suitable classification algorithm for music genre classification, providing insights into the strengths and limitations of each method.\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\b Methodology\par
\b0 The methodology remains consistent with the previous documentation. However, instead of training multiple models with different algorithms, we will focus on implementing and evaluating KNN and Naive Bayes classifiers specifically.\par
\par
\b Implementation Details\b0\par
\b K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) Classifier\par
\b0 Implementation: Utilize the KNN algorithm from the scikit-learn library.\par
Parameters: Tune the number of neighbors (K) to optimize classification performance.\par
Feature Space: Utilize the extracted audio features as input to the KNN classifier.\par
\b Naive Bayes Classifier\b0\par
Implementation: Implement the Gaussian Naive Bayes algorithm from the scikit-learn library.\par
Assumption: Assume that features are conditionally independent given the class label.\par
\b Feature Space\b0 : Utilize the same set of extracted audio features as input to the Naive Bayes classifier.\par
\par
\b Evaluation Metrics\b0\par
The performance of both KNN and Naive Bayes classifiers will be evaluated using the following metrics:\par
\par
Accuracy: The proportion of correctly classified instances out of the total instances.\par
Precision: The ratio of correctly predicted positive observations to the total predicted positives.\par
Recall: The ratio of correctly predicted positive observations to all observations in the actual class.\par
F1-score: The harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a balance between the two metrics.\par
\b\par
Conclusion\b0\par
By comparing the performance of KNN and Naive Bayes classifiers on the music genre classification task, we aim to determine the effectiveness of each algorithm in accurately classifying music tracks. This comparison will provide valuable insights into the suitability of different classification approaches for this specific task, ultimately contributing to the successful completion of the project\par
}
 